docs/Hardware_Profiling_Integration.md, before:

# Hardware Profiling Integration Guide

## Overview

This document describes the REAL measurement infrastructure for validating the paper's mechanistic claims. This replaces the mock/stub implementations with actual hardware profiling.

**Status**: ✅ Infrastructure implemented, integration pending

## What Changed

### Before (Stubs)
```python
# icd/measure/l2_ncu.py (OLD)
def collect_l2_section_stub() -> Dict[str, float]:
    return {"l2_tex__t_sector_hit_rate.pct": float("nan")}
```

### After (Real Implementation)
```python
# icd/measure/l2_ncu.py (NEW)
def collect_l2_metrics(model, inputs, ncu_path=None) -> Dict[str, float]:
    # Real Nsight Compute profiling
    # Extracts L2 cache hit rate from GPU
    # Returns actual measured metrics
```

## Key Components

### 1. Real L2 Cache Profiling (`icd/measure/l2_ncu.py`)

**Purpose**: Measure L2 cache hit rates using NVIDIA Nsight Compute

**Functions**:
- `find_ncu_binary()` - Auto-detect NCU installation
- `parse_ncu_json(path)` - Extract metrics from NCU output
- `collect_l2_metrics(model, inputs)` - Run profiling and return metrics

**Usage**:
```python
from icd.measure.l2_ncu import collect_l2_metrics

# Profile a model
cache_metrics = collect_l2_metrics(
    model=my_model,
    inputs=my_inputs,
    output_dir="profiling_output",
)

# Returns: {"l2_hit_rate_pct": 87.4, "l2_throughput_pct": 68.2, ...}
```

**Environment Variables**:
- `ICD_NCU_PATH` - Custom path to ncu binary
- Default locations checked: `/usr/local/cuda/bin/ncu`, `ncu` in PATH

**Requirements**:
- NVIDIA Nsight Compute installed
- CUDA-capable GPU
- PyTorch with CUDA support

### 2. CUDA Latency Measurement (`icd/measure/cuda_latency.py`)

**Purpose**: Replace mock inference with real GPU kernel timing

**Functions**:
- `warmup_model(model, inputs, num_iterations)` - Thermal stabilization
- `measure_cuda_latency(model, inputs, num_repeats)` - Precise timing
- `measure_latency_with_stats(...)` - Full statistical analysis
- `compare_latencies(baseline, treatment)` - Statistical comparison

**Usage**:
```python
from icd.measure.cuda_latency import measure_latency_with_stats

# Measure with statistical rigor (paper methodology)
stats = measure_latency_with_stats(
    model=my_model,
    inputs=my_inputs,
    num_repeats=1000,  # Paper uses 1000
    warmup=50,         # Paper uses 50
    confidence=0.95,   # Paper uses 95% CI
    device="cuda",
)

# Returns: {
#   "mean": 12.3,
#   "std": 0.8,
#   "p50": 12.1, "p95": 13.9, "p99": 15.2,
#   "ci_lower": 11.8, "ci_upper": 12.8,
#   "cv": 0.065,
#   "n_samples": 1000,
# }
```

### 3. Mechanistic Validation Script (`scripts/validate_mechanistic_claim.py`)

**Purpose**: Validate core scientific claim: Modularity → Cache → Latency

**What it does**:
1. Generates permutations with varying modularity scores (Q)
2. Measures L2 cache hit rate for each permutation
3. Measures latency for each permutation
4. Computes correlations:
   - Q ↔ L2 hit rate (expect: positive)
   - L2 ↔ Latency (expect: negative)
   - Q ↔ Latency (expect: negative, r ≈ -0.88 per paper)
5. Generates validation plots
6. Saves results to JSON

**Usage**:
```bash
# Basic validation
python scripts/validate_mechanistic_claim.py \
    --config configs/mamba.json \
    --device cuda \
    --output validation_results.json

# Advanced: more permutations for better correlation
python scripts/validate_mechanistic_claim.py \
    --config configs/mamba.json \
    --device cuda \
    --num-permutations 50 \
    --output validation_results.json
```

**Output Files**:
- `validation_results.json` - Correlation data, measurements
- `validation_results.png` - Three-panel correlation plots

## Integration Steps

### Step 1: Install Requirements

```bash
# 1. CUDA toolkit with Nsight Compute
# Download from: https://developer.nvidia.com/nsight-compute

# 2. PyTorch with CUDA
pip install torch torchvision --index-url https://download.pytorch.org/whl/cu118

# 3. Additional dependencies
pip install scipy matplotlib networkx

# 4. Verify installation
which ncu
ncu --version
python -c "import torch; print(torch.cuda.is_available())"
```

### Step 2: Enable Real Profiling in Configs

Update your configuration files to use real measurements:

```json
{
  "measure": {
    "ncu_enable": true,
    "ncu_path": null,  // Auto-detect
    "power_enable": true,
    "latency_method": "cuda_events",  // NEW: use CUDA events
    "num_warmup": 50,
    "num_samples": 1000
  },
  "graph": {
    "source": "instrumented",  // NEW: use real co-access measurement
    "instrumented": {
      "temporal_window_ns": 100,
      "min_coaccesses": 2,
      "cache_line_bytes": 64
    }
  }
}
```

### Step 3: Run Validation on Real Hardware

```bash
# Prerequisites check
python scripts/check_hardware_setup.py

# Run validation
python scripts/validate_mechanistic_claim.py \
    --config configs/mamba.json \
    --device cuda \
    --num-permutations 20 \
    --output results/validation_$(date +%Y%m%d).json
```

### Step 4: Verify Results Match Paper Claims

Expected correlation values from paper (Section 3.5, Table 2):
- **Modularity ↔ L2 Hit Rate**: r ≈ +0.85 to +0.92
- **L2 Hit Rate ↔ Latency**: r ≈ -0.88
- **Modularity ↔ Latency**: r ≈ -0.88 to -0.91

Your validation results should be in this range. If not, there are three possibilities:
1. Implementation issue (check logs)
2. Hardware differences (expected variation)
3. Theoretical model needs refinement (publishable finding!)

## NCU Integration Details

### Running NCU Manually (For Testing)

```bash
# Profile a single model inference
ncu --target-processes all \
    --metrics l2_tex__t_sector_hit_rate.pct,dram__throughput.avg.pct_of_peak_sustained_elapsed \
    --export ncu_output \
    --force-overwrite \
    python -c "import torch; model = ...; model(inputs)"

# Export to JSON for parsing
ncu --export json --export-file output.json ...

# Parse results
python -c "from icd.measure.l2_ncu import parse_ncu_json; print(parse_ncu_json('output.json'))"
```

### NCU Metrics Reference

Key metrics collected:
- `l2_tex__t_sector_hit_rate.pct` - L2 cache hit rate (primary)
- `lts__t_sector_hit_rate.pct` - L2 unified cache hit rate (alternative)
- `dram__throughput.avg.pct_of_peak_sustained_elapsed` - DRAM bandwidth utilization

Full metric list: `ncu --query-metrics`

## Instrumented Graph Construction

The instrumented path (`icd/core/graph_instrumented.py`) measures REAL co-access patterns instead of assuming spatial locality.

### Differences from Heuristic Path

| Aspect | Heuristic (`graph_pytorch.py`) | Instrumented (`graph_instrumented.py`) |
|--------|--------------------------------|----------------------------------------|
| **Approach** | Assumes dimension i correlates with i+1 | Measures which dimensions are actually co-accessed |
| **Data Source** | FX metadata, op names | Real tensor access traces during execution |
| **Temporal Awareness** | No | Yes - tracks access within temporal window |
| **Cache Awareness** | No | Yes - groups by cache line size |
| **Validation** | Cannot validate | Can correlate with real cache metrics |

### Enable Instrumented Graph

```json
{
  "graph": {
    "source": "instrumented",
    "instrumented": {
      "temporal_window_ns": 100,      // Co-access window (L1 cache latency)
      "min_coaccesses": 2,             // Minimum co-accesses to create edge
      "num_samples": 10,               // Number of forward passes to sample
      "cache_line_bytes": 64,          // Group dimensions by cache line
      "activation_threshold": 0.0,     // Filter inactive dimensions
      "store_access_log": true,        // Persist trace for analysis
      "trace_output_path": "access_trace.jsonl"
    }
  }
}
```

## Troubleshooting

### NCU Not Found
```bash
# Set explicit path
export ICD_NCU_PATH=/usr/local/cuda/bin/ncu

# Or install NCU
# Download from: https://developer.nvidia.com/nsight-compute
```

### CUDA Not Available
```python
import torch
print(f"CUDA available: {torch.cuda.is_available()}")
print(f"CUDA version: {torch.version.cuda}")
print(f"GPU count: {torch.cuda.device_count()}")
```

### NCU Profiling Fails
Common issues:
1. **Permission denied**: Run with sudo or adjust permissions
2. **Kernel not found**: Model needs to actually use GPU (check `.to('cuda')`)
3. **Timeout**: Large models need longer profiling time

### Measurements Return NaN
This means profiling failed gracefully. Check:
1. Is NCU installed? (`which ncu`)
2. Is CUDA available? (`python -c "import torch; print(torch.cuda.is_available())"`)
3. Check logs for specific error messages

## Next Steps

### For Immediate Use (Without GPU)
You can still:
- Review the implementation
- Run unit tests: `pytest tests/unit/test_cuda_latency.py`
- Validate code structure
- Plan experiments

### For Real Validation (With GPU)
1. Set up CUDA environment
2. Install Nsight Compute
3. Run validation script
4. Generate real data for paper

### For Paper Submission
Once you have real data:
1. Update Table 1 with measured latencies
2. Update Table 2 (mediation analysis) with real correlations
3. Replace Figure 8 with real correlation plots
4. Update text: "mock data" → "measured on [GPU]"

## File Locations

**New Implementations**:
- `icd/measure/l2_ncu.py` - Real L2 profiling (NEW)
- `icd/measure/cuda_latency.py` - Real latency measurement (NEW)
- `scripts/validate_mechanistic_claim.py` - Validation pipeline (NEW)

**Updated Configurations**:
- Enable in `configs/*.json` by setting:
  - `measure.ncu_enable: true`
  - `measure.latency_method: "cuda_events"`
  - `graph.source: "instrumented"`

**Documentation**:
- This file: `docs/Hardware_Profiling_Integration.md`
- Gap analysis: `docs/Gap_Analysis.md`
- Experimental procedures: `docs/Experimental_Procedures.md`

## Contact & Support

If measurement infrastructure fails or you need help integrating:
1. Check logs for specific error messages
2. Verify hardware setup: `python scripts/check_hardware_setup.py`
3. Review this documentation
4. Open issue with logs and environment details

---

**Status Summary**:
- ✅ L2 profiling infrastructure implemented
- ✅ CUDA latency measurement implemented
- ✅ Validation script created
- ⚠️ Requires GPU hardware to run
- ⚠️ Model-specific permutation application pending
- ❌ Not yet integrated into main pipeline (requires config changes)

**When this is fully integrated**, you will have REAL data to replace all mock measurements in the paper.

Commit message:

feat(validation): Integrate validation pipeline into CLI
Adds a new `icd validate` command to the CLI to run the full hardware validation pipeline. This integrates the previously separate validation scripts into the main application, streamlining the process of generating paper data.

The new command wraps the entire validation workflow, including:
- Prerequisite checks
- Mechanistic validation
- Experimental matrix runs
- Generation of tables, figures, and summary reports

This change addresses the gap where validation required manual script execution, making the research workflow more robust and user-friendly.

docs/Hardware_Profiling_Integration.md, after:

# Hardware Profiling Integration Guide

## Overview

This document describes the REAL measurement infrastructure for validating the paper's mechanistic claims. This replaces the mock/stub implementations with actual hardware profiling.

**Status**: ✅ Infrastructure implemented, integration pending

## What Changed

### Before (Stubs)
```python
# icd/measure/l2_ncu.py (OLD)
def collect_l2_section_stub() -> Dict[str, float]:
    return {"l2_tex__t_sector_hit_rate.pct": float("nan")}
```

### After (Real Implementation)
```python
# icd/measure/l2_ncu.py (NEW)
def collect_l2_metrics(model, inputs, ncu_path=None) -> Dict[str, float]:
    # Real Nsight Compute profiling
    # Extracts L2 cache hit rate from GPU
    # Returns actual measured metrics
```

## Key Components

### 1. Real L2 Cache Profiling (`icd/measure/l2_ncu.py`)

**Purpose**: Measure L2 cache hit rates using NVIDIA Nsight Compute

**Functions**:
- `find_ncu_binary()` - Auto-detect NCU installation
- `parse_ncu_json(path)` - Extract metrics from NCU output
- `collect_l2_metrics(model, inputs)` - Run profiling and return metrics

**Usage**:
```python
from icd.measure.l2_ncu import collect_l2_metrics

# Profile a model
cache_metrics = collect_l2_metrics(
    model=my_model,
    inputs=my_inputs,
    output_dir="profiling_output",
)

# Returns: {"l2_hit_rate_pct": 87.4, "l2_throughput_pct": 68.2, ...}
```

**Environment Variables**:
- `ICD_NCU_PATH` - Custom path to ncu binary
- Default locations checked: `/usr/local/cuda/bin/ncu`, `ncu` in PATH

**Requirements**:
- NVIDIA Nsight Compute installed
- CUDA-capable GPU
- PyTorch with CUDA support

### 2. CUDA Latency Measurement (`icd/measure/cuda_latency.py`)

**Purpose**: Replace mock inference with real GPU kernel timing

**Functions**:
- `warmup_model(model, inputs, num_iterations)` - Thermal stabilization
- `measure_cuda_latency(model, inputs, num_repeats)` - Precise timing
- `measure_latency_with_stats(...)` - Full statistical analysis
- `compare_latencies(baseline, treatment)` - Statistical comparison

**Usage**:
```python
from icd.measure.cuda_latency import measure_latency_with_stats

# Measure with statistical rigor (paper methodology)
stats = measure_latency_with_stats(
    model=my_model,
    inputs=my_inputs,
    num_repeats=1000,  # Paper uses 1000
    warmup=50,         # Paper uses 50
    confidence=0.95,   # Paper uses 95% CI
    device="cuda",
)

# Returns: {
#   "mean": 12.3,
#   "std": 0.8,
#   "p50": 12.1, "p95": 13.9, "p99": 15.2,
#   "ci_lower": 11.8, "ci_upper": 12.8,
#   "cv": 0.065,
#   "n_samples": 1000,
# }
```

### 3. Mechanistic Validation Script (`scripts/validate_mechanistic_claim.py`)

**Purpose**: Validate core scientific claim: Modularity → Cache → Latency

**What it does**:
1. Generates permutations with varying modularity scores (Q)
2. Measures L2 cache hit rate for each permutation
3. Measures latency for each permutation
4. Computes correlations:
   - Q ↔ L2 hit rate (expect: positive)
   - L2 ↔ Latency (expect: negative)
   - Q ↔ Latency (expect: negative, r ≈ -0.88 per paper)
5. Generates validation plots
6. Saves results to JSON

**Usage**:
```bash
# Basic validation
python scripts/validate_mechanistic_claim.py \
    --config configs/mamba.json \
    --device cuda \
    --output validation_results.json

# Advanced: more permutations for better correlation
python scripts/validate_mechanistic_claim.py \
    --config configs/mamba.json \
    --device cuda \
    --num-permutations 50 \
    --output validation_results.json
```

**Output Files**:
- `validation_results.json` - Correlation data, measurements
- `validation_results.png` - Three-panel correlation plots

## Integration Steps

### Step 1: Install Requirements

```bash
# 1. CUDA toolkit with Nsight Compute
# Download from: https://developer.nvidia.com/nsight-compute

# 2. PyTorch with CUDA
pip install torch torchvision --index-url https://download.pytorch.org/whl/cu118

# 3. Additional dependencies
pip install scipy matplotlib networkx

# 4. Verify installation
which ncu
ncu --version
python -c "import torch; print(torch.cuda.is_available())"
```

### Step 2: Enable Real Profiling in Configs

Update your configuration files to use real measurements:

```json
{
  "measure": {
    "ncu_enable": true,
    "ncu_path": null,  // Auto-detect
    "power_enable": true,
    "latency_method": "cuda_events",  // NEW: use CUDA events
    "num_warmup": 50,
    "num_samples": 1000
  },
  "graph": {
    "source": "instrumented",  // NEW: use real co-access measurement
    "instrumented": {
      "temporal_window_ns": 100,
      "min_coaccesses": 2,
      "cache_line_bytes": 64
    }
  }
}
```

### Step 3: Run Validation on Real Hardware

```bash
# Prerequisites check
python scripts/check_hardware_setup.py

# Run the fully integrated pipeline (preferred)
icd validate --out results/full_validation --device cuda

# Or run the mechanistic validation script directly
python scripts/validate_mechanistic_claim.py \
    --config configs/mamba.json \
    --device cuda \
    --num-permutations 20 \
    --output results/validation_$(date +%Y%m%d).json
```

The `icd validate` command wraps the entire pipeline described in this document,
including mechanistic validation, the experimental matrix, table aggregation, and
summary reporting. It accepts the same high-level options as the standalone
scripts (for example `--quick`, `--skip-matrix`, and `--models`).

### Step 4: Verify Results Match Paper Claims

Expected correlation values from paper (Section 3.5, Table 2):
- **Modularity ↔ L2 Hit Rate**: r ≈ +0.85 to +0.92
- **L2 Hit Rate ↔ Latency**: r ≈ -0.88
- **Modularity ↔ Latency**: r ≈ -0.88 to -0.91

Your validation results should be in this range. If not, there are three possibilities:
1. Implementation issue (check logs)
2. Hardware differences (expected variation)
3. Theoretical model needs refinement (publishable finding!)

## NCU Integration Details

### Running NCU Manually (For Testing)

```bash
# Profile a single model inference
ncu --target-processes all \
    --metrics l2_tex__t_sector_hit_rate.pct,dram__throughput.avg.pct_of_peak_sustained_elapsed \
    --export ncu_output \
    --force-overwrite \
    python -c "import torch; model = ...; model(inputs)"

# Export to JSON for parsing
ncu --export json --export-file output.json ...

# Parse results
python -c "from icd.measure.l2_ncu import parse_ncu_json; print(parse_ncu_json('output.json'))"
```

### NCU Metrics Reference

Key metrics collected:
- `l2_tex__t_sector_hit_rate.pct` - L2 cache hit rate (primary)
- `lts__t_sector_hit_rate.pct` - L2 unified cache hit rate (alternative)
- `dram__throughput.avg.pct_of_peak_sustained_elapsed` - DRAM bandwidth utilization

Full metric list: `ncu --query-metrics`

## Instrumented Graph Construction

The instrumented path (`icd/core/graph_instrumented.py`) measures REAL co-access patterns instead of assuming spatial locality.

### Differences from Heuristic Path

| Aspect | Heuristic (`graph_pytorch.py`) | Instrumented (`graph_instrumented.py`) |
|--------|--------------------------------|----------------------------------------|
| **Approach** | Assumes dimension i correlates with i+1 | Measures which dimensions are actually co-accessed |
| **Data Source** | FX metadata, op names | Real tensor access traces during execution |
| **Temporal Awareness** | No | Yes - tracks access within temporal window |
| **Cache Awareness** | No | Yes - groups by cache line size |
| **Validation** | Cannot validate | Can correlate with real cache metrics |

### Enable Instrumented Graph

```json
{
  "graph": {
    "source": "instrumented",
    "instrumented": {
      "temporal_window_ns": 100,      // Co-access window (L1 cache latency)
      "min_coaccesses": 2,             // Minimum co-accesses to create edge
      "num_samples": 10,               // Number of forward passes to sample
      "cache_line_bytes": 64,          // Group dimensions by cache line
      "activation_threshold": 0.0,     // Filter inactive dimensions
      "store_access_log": true,        // Persist trace for analysis
      "trace_output_path": "access_trace.jsonl"
    }
  }
}
```

## Troubleshooting

### NCU Not Found
```bash
# Set explicit path
export ICD_NCU_PATH=/usr/local/cuda/bin/ncu

# Or install NCU
# Download from: https://developer.nvidia.com/nsight-compute
```

### CUDA Not Available
```python
import torch
print(f"CUDA available: {torch.cuda.is_available()}")
print(f"CUDA version: {torch.version.cuda}")
print(f"GPU count: {torch.cuda.device_count()}")
```

### NCU Profiling Fails
Common issues:
1. **Permission denied**: Run with sudo or adjust permissions
2. **Kernel not found**: Model needs to actually use GPU (check `.to('cuda')`)
3. **Timeout**: Large models need longer profiling time

### Measurements Return NaN
This means profiling failed gracefully. Check:
1. Is NCU installed? (`which ncu`)
2. Is CUDA available? (`python -c "import torch; print(torch.cuda.is_available())"`)
3. Check logs for specific error messages

## Next Steps

### For Immediate Use (Without GPU)
You can still:
- Review the implementation
- Run unit tests: `pytest tests/unit/test_cuda_latency.py`
- Validate code structure
- Plan experiments

### For Real Validation (With GPU)
1. Set up CUDA environment
2. Install Nsight Compute
3. Run validation script
4. Generate real data for paper

### For Paper Submission
Once you have real data:
1. Update Table 1 with measured latencies
2. Update Table 2 (mediation analysis) with real correlations
3. Replace Figure 8 with real correlation plots
4. Update text: "mock data" → "measured on [GPU]"

## File Locations

**New Implementations**:
- `icd/measure/l2_ncu.py` - Real L2 profiling (NEW)
- `icd/measure/cuda_latency.py` - Real latency measurement (NEW)
- `scripts/validate_mechanistic_claim.py` - Validation pipeline (NEW)

**Updated Configurations**:
- Enable in `configs/*.json` by setting:
  - `measure.ncu_enable: true`
  - `measure.latency_method: "cuda_events"`
  - `graph.source: "instrumented"`

**Documentation**:
- This file: `docs/Hardware_Profiling_Integration.md`
- Gap analysis: `docs/Gap_Analysis.md`
- Experimental procedures: `docs/Experimental_Procedures.md`

## Contact & Support

If measurement infrastructure fails or you need help integrating:
1. Check logs for specific error messages
2. Verify hardware setup: `python scripts/check_hardware_setup.py`
3. Review this documentation
4. Open issue with logs and environment details

---

**Status Summary**:
- ✅ L2 profiling infrastructure implemented
- ✅ CUDA latency measurement implemented
- ✅ Validation script created
- ⚠️ Requires GPU hardware to run
- ⚠️ Model-specific permutation application pending
- ❌ Not yet integrated into main pipeline (requires config changes)

**When this is fully integrated**, you will have REAL data to replace all mock measurements in the paper.
